SOURCE: https://cityclerk.lacity.org/onlinedocs/2023/23-1134_misc_1_12-02-2025.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 17:44 UTC
CAPTURE: team, robots.txt allowed

        An ordinance amending Sections 12.95.2, 16.60, 47.06, 47.07, 47.08, 151.06,
151.07, 151.09, 151.30, 163.05, and 165.06 of the Los Angeles Municipal Code to
revise the annual automatic rent adjustment formula for rental units subject to the Rent
Stabilization Ordinance (RSO), eliminate rent adjustments for dependents added to an
existing tenancy, and make other technical changes.




                    VERSION “B”
                         ORDINANCE NO. ________________

        An ordinance amending Sections 12.95.2, 16.60, 47.06, 47.07, 47.08, 151.06,
151.07, 151.09, 151.30, 163.05, and 165.06 of the Los Angeles Municipal Code to
revise the annual automatic rent adjustment formula for rental units subject to the Rent
Stabilization Ordinance (RSO), eliminate rent adjustments for dependents added to an
existing tenancy, and make other technical changes.

                   THE PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF LOS ANGELES
                          DO ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:

       Section. 1. Subdivision 1 of Subsection K, Section 12.95.2, Article 2.9, Chapter I
of the Los Angeles Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

      K.     Rental Housing Production:

              1.     As a condition of tentative map or preliminary parcel map approval,
      the Advisory Agency shall require that the applicant or the applicant’s successor-
      in-interest pay to the City a fee of $1,492 for each unit in a residential or
      residential to commercial/industrial conversion project, based on the number of
      units in the project prior to conversion. For the year beginning July 1, 2008, and
      all subsequent years, the fee amount shall be adjusted on an annual basis
      pursuant to the formula set forth in Section 151.06 D. of this Code, except that
      the increase shall be based on 100 percent of the percentage change as
      determined by the Department. The adjusted amount shall be rounded to the
      nearest $50 increment. This fee shall be paid prior to approval of the final map
      by the City Engineer.

      Sec. 2. Sub-sub-subparagraph b. of Sub-subparagraph (ii), Subparagraph (3),
paragraph (b), Subdivision 3., Subsection A., Section 16.60, Article 6.1, Chapter I of the
Los Angeles Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

                    b.     The amount for the Section 8 Department Voucher Payment
             Standard, the determination of the affordable rent per Section 50053 of
             the California Health and Safety Code, and the estimated incidental
             moving costs shall be determined upon the adoption of this ordinance, and
             then adjusted annually according to the Consumer Price Index-All Urban
             Consumers. For the year beginning July 1, 2025, and all subsequent
             years, the fee amounts shall be adjusted on an annual basis pursuant to
             the formula set forth in Section 151.06.D. of this Code except that the
             increase shall be based on 100 percent of the percentage change as
             determined by the Department. The adjusted amount shall be rounded to
             the nearest $50 increment. LAHD shall publish the amount annually; and




                                            1
     Sec. 3. Sub-subparagraph (vi), Subparagraph (3), Paragraph (b), Subdivision 3.,
Subsection A, Section 16.60, Article 6.1, Chapter I of the Los Angeles Municipal Code is
amended to read as follows:

                      (vi)  No demolition permit shall be issued unless LAHD provides
              a written clearance to the Department of Building and Safety stating that
              the owner has complied with the relocation assistance requirements of this
              section. The owner shall provide proof of compliance with the relocation
              assistance requirements of this section on a form provided by LAHD. The
              form shall be accompanied by a fee of $45 per unit. The fee shall be
              adjusted annually pursuant to Section 151.06 D. of this Code, except that
              the increase shall be based on 100 percent of the percentage change as
              determined by the Department. LAHD shall publish the fee annually.

      Sec. 4. Subdivision C of Section 47.06, Article 7, Chapter IV of the Los Angeles
Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

        C.     Relocation Assistance Required. In connection with the conversion of a
building into a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative, as those terms
are defined in the California Government Code and Business and Professions Code, or
into a hotel or apartment hotel or to a use permitted in any commercial zone, the
landlord shall pay the City a fee for the purpose of providing relocation assistance by
the City’s Relocation Assistance Service Provider to each tenant in accordance with
Subsection D of this section. The fee shall be $971 for each unit occupied by a
qualified tenant and $604 for each unit occupied by other tenants, and an additional $83
per unit administrative fee to pay for the administrative costs associated with this
service. The fees, set forth above, may be increased annually pursuant to
Section 151.06 D. of this Code except that the increase shall be based on 100 percent
of the percentage change as determined by the Department.

       This subsection shall not apply where a subdivision map application for
condominiums, stock cooperative or community apartment purposes was filed for
approval with the City prior to the issuance of the original certificate of occupancy for the
building. A landlord’s obligation to comply with Subsection D of this section does not
exist prior to the time the landlord gives the notice of intention to convert required by
Government Code Section 66427.1.

      Sec. 5. Subsection C of Section 47.07, Article 7, Chapter IV of the Los Angeles
Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

        C.    Relocation Assistance Required. The landlord shall pay the City a fee
for the purpose of providing relocation assistance by the City’s Relocation Assistance
Service Provider to each tenant in accordance with Subsection D of this section in
connection with the demolition of a building or its relocation to another site for either of
the following purposes: (1) to construct a new condominium, community apartment or
stock cooperative, as those terms are defined in the California Government Code and



                                              2
Business and Professions Code; or (2) to use the property for any commercial purpose.
Where a landlord is required, pursuant to a condition of approval of a subdivision map,
to give a tenant a notice of intention to demolish, the landlord’s obligation to comply with
this section does not exist prior to the giving of that notice. The fee shall be $971 for
each unit occupied by a qualified tenant and $604 for each unit occupied by other
tenants, and an additional $83 per unit to pay for the administrative costs associated
with this service. The fees, set forth above, may be increased annually pursuant to
Section 151.06 D. of this Code except that the increase shall be based on 100% of the
percentage change as determined by the Department.

      Sec. 6. Subdivision 3 of Subsection C, Section 47.08, Article 7, Chapter IV of the
Los Angeles Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

              3.     Management shall pay the City a fee for the purpose of providing
       relocation assistance by the City’s Relocation Assistance Service Provider to
       each tenant in accordance with Subsection D. of this section. The fee shall be
       $971 for each unit occupied by a qualified tenant and $604 for each unit
       occupied by other tenants, and an additional $83 per unit administrative fee to
       pay for the administrative costs associated with this service. The fees, set forth
       above, may be increased annually pursuant to Section 151.06 D. of this Code
       except that the increase shall be based on 100 percent of the percentage change
       as determined by the Department.

      Sec. 7. Subsection D of Section 151.06, Article 1, Chapter XV of the Los
Angeles Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

             D.     The maximum rent or maximum adjusted rent may be increased
       annually based on 90 percent of the difference between the average of the
       Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for All items in Los Angeles-
       Long Beach-Anaheim, CA for the most recent consecutive 12-month period
       ending on September 30 and the average of the same index for the prior
       consecutive 12-month period ending on September 30, calculated as a
       percentage and rounded off to the nearest whole number.

               The allowable annual rent adjustment shall be 90 percent of the
       percentage change rounded off to the nearest whole number as determined by
       the Department. If the allowable annual rent adjustment is less than one percent,
       a landlord may increase the maximum or maximum adjusted rent by up to one
       percent. In no event, however, may an annual rent increase under this
       subsection exceed four percent. An annual rent adjustment under this
       subsection may be applied to any annual rent increase that first becomes
       effective on or before July 1, through June 30, of each year. The Department
       shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation the allowable annual rent
       adjustment on or before May 30 of each year. No rent increase may be imposed
       pursuant to this subsection within twelve consecutive months of the effective date




                                             3
      of a prior rent increase pursuant to this subsection or Subsections A, B, C, D, or
      F.1 of this section.

             Any annual rent increase not previously noticed and served during the
      period beginning June 1, 2025, through June 30, 2026, shall comply with this
      subsection. Any such rent increase shall not exceed three percent and shall not
      include any additional increase based on the landlord’s payment of utilities.

            A landlord shall not impose an annual rent increase for a rental unit
      pursuant to this subsection if any of the following apply:

                         1. The rental unit is the subject of a notice of noncompliance
                  sent to the Franchise Tax Board pursuant to Revenue and Taxation
                  Code Section 17274 as may be amended, and the violations that were
                  the subject of the Notice have not been corrected;

                        2. The rental unit is the subject of a notice of rent reduction
                  issued under to this chapter or a Notice of Acceptance into the Rent
                  Escrow Account Program under Chapter 15, Article 2 of this Code, and
                  the conditions that caused the placement have not been corrected; or

                         3. A criminal conviction has been obtained related to the
                  landlord’s failure to comply with a citation or order issued by the
                  Department of Building and Safety, Fire Department, or the Los
                  Angeles County Department of Health about the subject rental unit,
                  and the conditions that caused the conviction have not been corrected.

      Sec. 8. Paragraph (iii) of Subdivision (a), Subsection G, Section 151.06, Article
1, Chapter XV of the Los Angeles Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

             (iii)  This subsection shall not apply for any dependent added to an
      existing tenancy.

      Sec. 9. Subdivision 6 of Subsection A of Section 151.07, Article 1, Chapter XV of
the Los Angeles Municipal Code is amended to read as follows.

             6.      (Deleted.)

        Sec. 10. The first three unnumbered paragraphs of Subsection G, of Section
151.09, Article 1, Chapter XV of the Los Angeles Municipal Code are amended to read
as follows:

            G. Except for relocation fees owed pursuant to the provisions of
      Subsection E. of Section 151.30 of this Code, if the termination of tenancy is
      based on the grounds set forth in Subdivisions 8., 10., 11., 12., 13. or 14. of
      Subsection A. of this section, then the landlord shall pay a relocation fee of:



                                            4
      $23,150 to qualified tenants and a $11,000 fee to all other tenants who have
      lived in their rental unit for fewer than three years; $27,400 to qualified tenants
      and a $14,400 fee to all other tenants who have lived in their rental unit for three
      years or longer; or $27,400 to qualified tenants and $14,400 to all other tenants
      whose household income is 80% or below Area Median Income (AMI), as
      adjusted for household size, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and
      Urban Development, regardless of length of tenancy. Relocation fees owed for
      the termination of tenancy set forth in Subdivision 14. shall be based on the
      applicable provisions of the Uniform Relocation Act, California Relocation
      Assistance Act, or the amount set forth in this section. If more than one fee
      applies to a rental unit, the landlord shall pay the highest of the applicable fees.
      Tenants who claim eligibility based on their income shall file a statement with the
      Department verifying their income on a form prescribed by the Department.
      Requests for a hearing to appeal a decision regarding a tenant’s relocation
      assistance eligibility, including disputes about eligibility for higher relocation
      assistance based on a tenant’s income, age, length of tenancy, family status
      and/or disability status, must be filed in writing on the form prescribed by the
      Department and received by the Department within fifteen calendar days of the
      date of the Department’s notification of its decision regarding tenant relocation
      assistance.

              The Department shall charge a fee of $300 per rental unit for any hearing
      request under this subsection to pay for the cost of the appeal hearing. For the
      year beginning July 1, 2026, and all subsequent years, the fee amounts shall be
      adjusted on an annual basis pursuant to the formula set forth in Section 151.06
      D. of this Code except that the increase shall be based on 100% of the
      percentage change as determined by the Department. The adjusted amount
      shall be rounded to the nearest $50 increment.

             If a termination of tenancy is required due to a governmental agency order
      to vacate or comply, and the subject property has an approved use as a single
      family home and the structure containing the single family home contains two
      dwellings, the landlord shall pay a relocation fee in accordance with
      Section 151.09 G. of this Code to the tenant(s) of the affected rental unit(s) within
      15 days of receiving notice from the tenant(s) of their intention to terminate the
      tenancy.


      Sec. 11. Paragraph (d) of Subdivision 1, Subsection G, Section 151.09, Article of
the Los Angeles Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

                     d.    If the termination of tenancy is based on the grounds set
             forth in Subdivisions 8, 10, 11, or 12 of Subsection A of this section, then
             the landlord shall also pay the City a fee for the purpose of providing
             relocation assistance by the City’s Relocation Assistance Service
             Provider, as defined in Sections 47.06.B and 47.07.B of this Code. The



                                            5
             fee shall be $971 for each unit occupied by a qualified tenant and $604 for
             each unit occupied by other tenants, and an additional $83 per unit to pay
             for the administrative costs associated with this service. The fees, set
             forth above, may be increased annually on or before May 30, of each
             year, pursuant to Section 151.06.D. of this Code except that the increase
             shall be based on 100 percent of the percentage change as determined by
             the Department. The Relocation Assistance Service Provider will provide
             the relocation assistance services listed in Sections 47.06.D and 47.07 D
             of this Code.

      Sec. 12. Subsection E of Section 151.30, Article 1, Chapter XV of the Los Angeles
Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

             E. Relocation Fees. A landlord who terminates a tenancy pursuant to
      the provisions of Subdivision 8. of Subsection A. of Section 151.09 of this Code
      shall pay a relocation fee pursuant to the provisions of Subsection G. of Section
      151.09, except in the following circumstance:

             If the termination of tenancy is based on the grounds set forth in
      Paragraphs (a) or (b) of Subdivision 8. of Subsection A. of Section 151.09 of this
      Code, and all of the following conditions exist: (1) the building containing the
      rental unit contains four or fewer rental units; (2) within the previous three years
      the landlord has not paid the fee authorized by this Subsection to any tenant who
      resided in the building; (3) the landlord owns, in the City of Los Angeles, no more
      than four units of residential property and a single-family home on a separate lot;
      and (4) any eligible relative for whom the landlord is recovering possession of the
      rental unit does not own any residential property in the City of Los Angeles; then
      the landlord shall pay a relocation fee of $21,250 to qualified tenants and a fee of
      $10,550 to all other tenants. If more than one fee applies to a rental unit, the
      landlord shall pay the highest of the applicable fees. For the year beginning July
      1, 2026, and all subsequent years, the fee amounts shall be adjusted on an
      annual basis pursuant to the formula set forth in Section 151.06 D. of this Code
      except that the increase shall be based on 100 percent of the percentage change
      as determined by the Department. The adjusted amount shall be rounded to the
      nearest $50 increment. The fee payment shall be made in accordance with the
      provisions of Subdivisions 1., 2., and 3. of Subsection G. of Section 151.09 of
      this Code, and the provisions of Subdivision 4. of Subsection G. of Section
      151.09 apply to determine whether a relocation fee is owed.

      Sec.13. Section 163.05 of Article 3, Chapter XVI of the Los Angeles Municipal
Code is amended to read as follows:

SEC. 163.05. AMOUNT OF RELOCATION BENEFITS.

      The relocation payment shall be made available by the landlord to the tenant in
each residential unit and shall be in the amounts set forth in Section 151.09 G of this



                                            6
Code, or in an amount equal to the sum of two months of the established fair market
rent for the Los Angeles/Long Beach area as determined by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development pursuant to Section 1437(f) of Title 42 of the United States
Code, whichever amount is greater.

       Beginning on July 1, 2026, the relocation amount for qualified and all other
tenants shall be adjusted on an annual basis pursuant to the formula set forth in
Section 151.06 D. except that the increase shall be based on 100 percent of the
percentage change as determined by the Department. The adjusted amount shall be
rounded to the nearest fifty-dollar increment. If the relocation payment is based on the
established fair market rent for the Los Angeles/Long Beach area as determined by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to Section 1437(f) of Title 42
of the United States Code, then the relocation payment shall also include an amount, as
determined by the Enforcement Agency, sufficient for utility service deposits. The
relocation benefits shall be paid by the landlord in addition to the return, as required by
law, of any security deposits held by the landlord. The relocation benefits shall be made
on a per residential unit basis.

      Sec. 14. Subsection F of Section 165.06, Article 5, Chapter XVI of the Los
Angeles Municipal Code is amended to read as follows:

        F.    If the termination of tenancy is based on the grounds set forth in
Section 165.03 H, 165.03 I, 165.03 J, 165.03 K, or 165.03 N of this Code, then the
landlord shall also pay the City a fee for the purpose of providing relocation assistance
by the City’s Relocation Assistance Service Provider, as defined in Los Angeles
Municipal Code Sections 47.06 B and 47.07 B. The fee shall be $971 for each unit
occupied by a qualified tenant and $604 for each unit occupied by other tenants, and an
additional $83 per unit to pay for the administrative costs associated with this service.
The fees may be increased annually pursuant to the formula set forth in Section 151.06
D. of this Code except that the increase shall be based on 100 percent of the
percentage change as determined by the Department. The Relocation Assistance
Service Provider will provide the relocation assistance services listed in Los Angeles
Municipal Code Sections 47.06 D and 47.07 D. These fees shall not be charged when
Section 165.06 A.(6) applies.

        Sec. 15. SEVERABILITY. If any portion, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance
and each portion or subsection, sentence, clause and phrase herein, irrespective of the
fact that any one or more portions, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared invalid.




                                            7
       Sec. 16. The City Clerk shall certify to the passage of this ordinance and have it
published in accordance with Council policy, either in a daily newspaper circulated in
the City of Los Angeles or by posting for ten days in three public places in the City of
Los Angeles: one copy on the bulletin board located at the Main Street entrance to the
Los Angeles City Hall; one copy on the bulletin board located at the Main Street
entrance to the Los Angeles City Hall East; and one copy on the bulletin board located
at the Temple Street entrance to the Los Angeles County Hall of Records.


Approved as to Form and Legality

HYDEE FELDSTEIN SOTO, City Attorney


By
             PETER WALFORD
             Deputy City Attorney

Date December 2, 2025


File No.
M:\Housing\LAHD\Walford\Ordinances\RSO formula ordinance\Draft Ordinance RSO rent adjustment formula.docx




The Clerk of the City of Los Angeles
hereby certifies that the foregoing
ordinance was passed by the Council
of the City of Los Angeles.

CITY CLERK                                                       MAYOR




____________________________                                     ___________________________



Ordinance Passed_____________                                    Approved ___________________

